[7.13] docs: What’s new? (#675)
elastic/observability-docs: docs/en/observability/whats-new.asciidoc

Previously, an API in {kib} provided central management in Fleet.
We separated this component into an independent server to make it more scalable and secure.

Scalability is critical because we have users with hundreds of thousands of agents.
You can now enroll several times more agents into each node of {fleet-server} than you could previously with {kib}.
It's designed to have a low resource footprint both for CPU and memory,
and it can be scaled horizontally to handle the loads driven by our largest users.

Speed is especially critical when it comes to executing response actions for security incidents.
{agent}s maintain long polling connections to {fleet-server}. When an update or response action is applied,
{fleet-server} can update the agents in seconds by responding to those requests.
This provides a faster response time than you'd get with the default settings in Puppet, for example, which has a 30-minute run interval.

{fleet-server} also allows us to enable deployment scenarios with stronger security, particularly in segmented networks.
It's a common practice to use private networks with firewalls to reduce the surface area for attacks.

> {agent}s running on endpoints no longer need direct access to {kibana}.

Reviewer: @EamonnTP @bmorelli25 this is rendering incorrectly. Should it say {kib}?

Author: Yes, it should. It looks like this was fixed in https://github.com/elastic/observability-docs/pull/709.

Here are the highlights of what's new and improved in {minor-version}.

Other versions:
{observability-guide-all}/7.12/whats-new.html[7.12] |
{observability-guide-all}/7.11/whats-new.html[7.11] |
{observability-guide-all}/7.10/whats-new.html[7.10] |
https://www.elastic.co/blog/whats-new-elastic-observability-7-9-0-unified-agent-kpi-overview-dashboard[7.9] |
https://www.elastic.co/blog/elastic-observability-7-8-0-released[7.8] |
https://www.elastic.co/blog/elastic-observability-7-7-0-released[7.7] |
https://www.elastic.co/blog/elastic-observability-7-6-0-released[7.6] |
https://www.elastic.co/blog/elastic-observability-7-5-0-released[7.5] |
https://www.elastic.co/blog/elastic-observability-update-7-4-0[7.4]

[discrete]
== Give {minor-version} a try

Try {minor-version} now by deploying {es} and {kib} on
{ess-product}[Elastic Cloud] or
by https://www.elastic.co/start[downloading them].

// tag::whats-new[]
[discrete]
== Onboard logs and metrics for Azure services in a few clicks with expanded Microsoft integration (technical preview)

> We've enhanced support for Azure monitoring use cases with our new expanded native Microsoft integration,

Author: Done.

letting users easily onboard logs and metrics for their Azure services to Elastic Observability in a few clicks.

> This includes subscription level data like activity logs and all non-compute services like Azure SQL Database and Azure Data Factory.

Author: I don't think there are any missing words here. Commas do seem appropriate though. Added.

{fleet-server} provides visibility into the status of {agent}s, makes policy updates,
and executes fast response actions to security incidents. It's a new infrastructure component of the Elastic Stack.
Previously, an API in {kib} provided central management in Fleet.
We separated this component into an independent server to make it more scalable and secure.

Scalability is critical because we have users with hundreds of thousands of agents.
You can now enroll several times more agents into each node of {fleet-server} than you could previously with {kib}.
It's designed to have a low resource footprint both for CPU and memory,
and it can be scaled horizontally to handle the loads driven by our largest users.

Speed is especially critical when it comes to executing response actions for security incidents.
{agent}s maintain long polling connections to {fleet-server}. When an update or response action is applied,
{fleet-server} can update the agents in seconds by responding to those requests.
This provides a faster response time than you'd get with the default settings in Puppet, for example, which has a 30-minute run interval.

> {fleet-server} also allows us to enable more secure deployment scenarios, particularly in segmented networks.

Author: It sure is. Fixed.

{fleet-server} also allows us to enable deployment scenarios with stronger security, particularly in segmented networks.
It's a common practice to separate the sensitive data stored in {es} on a separate private network to reduce the surface area for attacks.
{agent}s running on endpoints don't have direct access to {es}.
They run outside this network on the open internet, in a DMZ, or separate VLAN. Instead, data flows through a pipeline,
such as Logstash or Kafka, before being ingested into {es}. Likewise, {agent}s can now connect to {fleet-server}.

> They no longer require direct access to {es} or {kib}, allowing for tighter controls in the network layer.

Author: @mostlyjason can you please see the convo in #obs-docs about this paragraph and recommend a path forward

Author: Suggestion from Slack:

```suggestion
{fleet-server} also allows us to enable deployment scenarios with stronger security, particularly in segmented networks.
It's a common practice to use private networks with firewalls to reduce the surface area for attacks.
{agent}s running on endpoints no longer need direct access to {kibana}.
They can now be restricted to {fleet-server}, allowing for tighter controls in the network layer.
```

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-new-apm-fleet.png[APM & {fleet} on {ecloud}]

When you need more than the default 512MB of memory due to increasing usage, it's easy to add more capacity.
In the Cloud Console, just add more memory by adjusting the instance size on the edit deployment page.

If you have an existing deployment without APM enabled, we encourage you to enable it.
This will make it easier to try the APM & {fleet} apps. Also, it's free, so there is little reason not to.
Just add capacity on the edit deployment page.

If you are a heavy user of your APM instance on Elastic Cloud, you should know that {fleet} requires additional memory.
Before upgrading to 7.13, we encourage you to check your memory usage in the Stack Monitoring app.
If you have less than 200MB left, we recommend increasing the size of your instance before upgrading to avoid a degradation in performance.
Then, evaluate the best size after completing the upgrade process.

Learn more in our {ece-ref}/ece-manage-apm.html[APM & {fleet} documentation].

[discrete]
== Collect logs from AWS Fargate

> In this release, we're expanding the AWS Fargate integration with the logs collection.

Author: It doesn't look like it existed before, so I accept.

Now you can use the {filebeat-ref}/filebeat-module-awsfargate.html[AWS Fargate module] in {filebeat} to
collect container logs from Amazon ECS on Fargate.
The module uses the {filebeat} {filebeat-ref}/filebeat-input-aws-cloudwatch.html[`awscloudwatch`]
input to get log files from one or more log streams in AWS CloudWatch.

> Logs from all containers in Fargate launch type tasks that can be sent to CloudWatch by adding the `awslogs`

Author: It looks like Fargate launch types are a thing and these are task definitions based on them. I'll clean it up a bit.

log driver under `logConfiguration` section in the task definition.

[discrete]
== APM Agents: Improved auto-instrumentation and better support of cloud native services

> In 7.13, we've added support for more frameworks when it comes to APM agent auto-instrumentation

Reviewer 2: Is it necessary to repeat frameworks? I think this sentence is a little wordy too.

Author: Good call. Removed.

to enable organizations to instrument their apps in an open and vendor-neutral manner.
Native support for OpenTelemetry protocol (aka OTLP) enables organizations to directly send data
collected by OpenTelemetry agents to their Elastic deployments.
Not only does this lower the effort for users to adopt OpenTelemetry into their existing Elastic architecture,
but it also simplifies the architecture.

Our support for OpenTelemetry is not new. In July 2020, we released the OpenTelemetry Collector exporter for Elastic,
which acted as a translation layer between OpenTelemetry agents and Elastic APM.
With the GA of OpenTelemetry protocol support in 7.13, we remove the need to install and manage this extra component.
Users can now directly send data from their OpenTelemetry agent to the Elastic APM server.
Using the OpenTelemetry Collector with the OTLP exporter is also supported,
bringing all the benefits provided by a collector deployed on the edge.

OpenTelemetry integration before v7.12::

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-otel-1.png[OpenTelemetry integration before v7.12]

OpenTelemetry integration GA in 7.13 (Experimental in v7.12)::

[role="screenshot"]

> image::images/7.13-otel-2.png[Experimental OpenTelemetry integration in v7.12 (GA in 7.13)]

Reviewer 2: I'm really not a fan of taking up so much space to show the *before* image. Is it necessary? Can we just show how it works now? The change is subtle between the two diagrams and will slow readers down.

Author: cc @cyrille-leclerc on this one. I agree that they take up a lot of screen real estate. In the Google doc they were side-by-side in a table, but that's unfortunately not reproducible in our doc system.

Author: I photoshopped the two images together and added a header in 3c09bd7.

<img width="745" alt="Screen Shot 2021-05-24 at 6 20 27 PM" src="https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/5618806/119425705-b9158180-bcbc-11eb-8110-19ba4963681d.png">

There's a lot going on here, and we'd love to have you be a part of this exciting new addition to the Elastic Observability suite.

[discrete]
== Time comparisons and enhanced APM service instance views

An improved APM Service Overview page introduced in version 7.12 streamlined troubleshooting workflows by presenting
all relevant information about service performance in a single comprehensive view.
The goal -- faster root cause analysis and lower MTTR.
We are excited to introduce several new enhancements to the Service Overview page to further this goal.

* **Time comparison view** allows users to quickly do a side-by-side comparison of the current and historical behavior.
For instance, they could overlay today's performance with yesterday's performance; or this week's performance to the week prior.
Such time comparisons are a common stop in an investigative workflow, and users can quickly spot deviations from past behavior.
* **Scatterplot view** visually shows service instances by latency and load distribution,
and can reveal which instances are behaving differently under load.
* **Enhanced instance panel** now lists richer metadata, such as service name, version,

> container, cloud metadata, etc.directly in the table,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
container, and cloud metadata, directly in the table,
```

Reviewer 2: Since you say "like," you don't have to say "etc" or "and so on"

so you can quickly identify what instance attribute might be contributing to a service issue without leaving the service overview page.
Users will also benefit from the ability to quickly examine container/pod/host metrics and logs for each of your service instances.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-apm-server-instance-view.png[Time comparisons and enhanced APM service instance views]

[discrete]
== A new curated way of exploring User Experience and Synthetic data (technical preview)

Have you ever had a question that you wanted to use your raw data to answer?
Whether you're trying to validate a hypothesis or simply looking for "interesting" insights in your data,
having a rich tool that enables this type of data visualization and manipulation is a critical part of any analytics solution.
{kib} currently has our Lens product which is an incredibly powerful tool, but given that it sits on top of the Elastic Stack,
it needs to be able to cater to all kinds of different data and requires the users to be familiar with things like index patterns and field names.

> This meant that there was often a barrier to most users who weren't familiar with these

Reviewer 2: tense shift here is a little awkward

Author: 😨 

Fixed.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-kpi-over-time-2.png[new exploratory view]

To access the Exploratory View, open Uptime or User Experience and click on the "Analyze data" link in the upper right-hand corner of the screen.

See {observability-guide}/exploratory-data-visualizations.html[Exploratory data visualizations] for more information.

[discrete]
== Improved infrastructure monitoring widget on Observability Overview

We updated the density of information about monitored infrastructure on the Observability Overview page,
improving the ability to quickly find causes of problems and troubleshooting the root cause.
The new Metrics widget now shows top hosts in your infrastructure with the largest resource footprint.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-improved-infra-mon.png[Improved infrastructure monitoring widget]

[discrete]
== Supporting runtime fields stored in {kib} index patterns in Logs UI

{kib} applications such as {kib} index pattern editor, Lens, and Discover, allow the creation of runtime fields. The Logs UI now extends support for choosing {kib} patterns and displaying and querying runtime fields in Logs UI.

> You can use {kib} index patterns to power the Logs UI, instead of choosing {es} index name patterns. This simplifies setup and administrative overhead and enables the visualization and querying of runtime fields stored in {kib} index patterns.

Reviewer 2: I haven't kept up with the Kibana changes, but I'mnot sure what the difference is between a Kibana index pattern and an Elasticsearch index name pattern. :-(

Author: @mukeshelastic can you comment on this? I'm not finding anything in the Kibana runtimes fields docs that differentiates between an ES / Kib index pattern.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-runtime-fields-kib.png[Supporting runtime fields stored in {kib}]

You can use the runtime fields stored in {kib} index patterns in the Logs UI, just like any other field.

[role="screenshot"]
image::images/7.13-use-runtime-fields.png[Use runtime fields]

[discrete]
== Improved troubleshooting of infrastructure anomalies

To help infrastructure ops teams monitor their massive deployments and spot any failing resources,

> we introduced anomaly detection for infrastructure resources (e.g., hosts, VMs, Kubernetes clusters).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
we introduced anomaly detection for infrastructure resources (for example, hosts, VMs, and Kubernetes clusters).
```

Reviewer 2: or maybe "such as"? we are supposed to avoid latin abbreviations

Author: Love it
